---
layout: post
title: Don't fear the command line
---

Hello, fellow felines, and human readers. I have a confession: computational biology used to *terrify* me. I would look through the complicated presentation of data in the figures, try to read the complicated methods section, all without understanding a single word. 

According to my human, back in grad school, there were two types of people - dry lab and wet lab people. The two seemed to be mutually exclusive, and to one another's dismay, lacked knowledge about the other's field. My human sat through many meetings and journal clubs, with the wet lab biologist complaining "all this computation is too complicated", and the dry lab biologist complaining "all these experimental details are unnecessary", both sides ending with "why should I care about learning more about this?" This seemed especially frustrating to my wet lab human, who was told "don't waste your time" when they expressed interest in learning more about the other side of the coin. In the end, my human decided to ignore the naysayers and start learning programming. 

I'm going to talk about the resources we've used so far, and how helpful they have been (or not). Keep in mind that these are subjective opinions, one thing that didn't work for us might work for you, and vice versa.

1. MOOCs
  1.1. Coursera's *R Programming* course was the first MOOC we tried. It didn't really work for us, and discouraged us from pursuing coding for a while. We don't think the course is actually bad, far from it, but it has a steep learning curve that steepens considerable after the first few chapters. We got stuck on one of the chapters on writing functions, then dropped it entirely. If you have done some programming, this one might work for you. If not, maybe not so much. For my human, whose primary scientific identity is a biologist, computer science can be very abstract and not intuitive as it is to someone who has been doing it for a long time. Keep this in mind, when you are looking into MOOCs, especially if you are planning on paying for them (this particular one was free at the time, I'm not sure about now).
  1.2. MIT's [computational biology courses]("https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-91j-foundations-of-computational-and-systems-biology-spring-2014/"). These are really neat! They are a series of graduate level lectures by computational biologists at MIT.

2. Books

3. Websites/blogs

4. Workshops/bootcamps

