---
layout: post
title: The story so far
---

*Note: this post summarizes the resources I've been using to learn bioinformatics. It is a work-in-progress, and will be updated periodically.*

Hello, fellow felines, and human readers! 
I have a confession: computational biology used to *terrify* me. I would look through the complicated presentation of data in the figures, try to read the complicated methods section, all without understanding a single word. 

According to my human, back in grad school, there were two types of people - dry lab and wet lab people. The two seemed to be mutually exclusive, and to one another's dismay, lacked knowledge about the other's field. My human sat through many meetings and journal clubs, with the wet lab biologist complaining "all this computation is too complicated", and the dry lab biologist complaining "all these experimental details are unnecessary", both sides ending with "why should I care about learning more about this?" This seemed especially frustrating to my wet lab human, who was told "don't waste your time" when they expressed interest in learning more about the other side of the coin. In the end, my human decided to ignore the naysayers and start learning programming. As her feline guardian, I completely approve of this decision, and have been patiently guiding my human through this process, while educating myself in the fine details of programming and biology as well. A smart cat is a well-rounded cat.

I'm going to talk about the resources we've used so far, and how helpful they have been (or not). Keep in mind that these are subjective opinions, one thing that didn't work for us might work for you, and vice versa. My ultimate goal? To become a molecular biologist who can effectively analyze their own high-throughput sequencing data, as well as come up with computational solutions to some of their own biological questions.

**1. MOOCs**

  1.1. Coursera's *R Programming* course was the first MOOC we tried. It didn't really work for us, and discouraged us from pursuing coding for a while. We don't think the course is actually bad, far from it, but it has a steep learning curve that steepens considerable after the first few chapters. We got stuck on one of the chapters on writing functions, then dropped it entirely. If you have done some programming, this one might work for you. If not, maybe not so much. For my human, whose primary scientific identity is a biologist, computer science can be very abstract and not intuitive as it is to someone who has been doing it for a long time. Keep this in mind, when you are looking into MOOCs, especially if you are planning on paying for them (this particular one was free at the time, I'm not sure about now).
  Pros: easy to get through if you already have some background in informatics.
  Cons: steep learning curve and sharp increase in difficulty within a few chapters.
  
  1.2. MIT's [computational biology courses]("https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-91j-foundations-of-computational-and-systems-biology-spring-2014/"). 
  These are really neat! They are a series of graduate level lectures by computational biologists at MIT. There are video lectures for all of the classes, so you can hear Chris Burge talk about the Gumbel probability distribution and have students write pseudo-code to understand how alignment matrices work. All in all, pretty cool. For someone with no mathematics or CS background? Not very easy to understand. Maybe I'm a little dense (I *am* a cat. Mostly, I think about chicken-flavored treats, sleeping, and chasing items that make jingling sounds). But if you're like me, and have zero background in computer science and the last biostatistics course you took was a while ago, this course is also not perfect for you. Final verdict, dropped it after three lectures or so. But I definitely plan on returning to this course someday when I have more time - it is more of a "foundations of statistics for functional genomics" type course, than a practical one. I don't want to be one of those people who can run pipelines and make violin plots without really understanding the concepts, but maybe, a biostatistics refresher is in order before I come back to this.
  Pros: an excellent primer in biostatistics and genomics. Free!
  Cons: doesn't teach any hands-on skills for analyzing data.
  
  1.3. Datacamp. 
  Recommended to me by an excellent bioinformatician, this is what I've benefited from the most. Datacamp is not biology-centric. It is a series of courses grouped into categories by language (when I started they only had Python and R, but now they've expanded to Unix, Git, Shell, and many more), and also has "professional tracks", like a data scientist track, or data analyst, or programmer, where all the courses are organized by the skills you learn. I completed about a third of the "R Data scientist" track. The best thing about datacamp is that it's not just slides or lectures, but also has you solving problems in tandem, through an interactive console, and checks your answers for the problem, effectively forcing you to learn in order to continue. It starts very slowly, and builds up slowly, so there wasn't a sharp increase in difficulty like there was in the coursera one, which is the exact reason it worked well for us...but honestly, I'm a busy cat, running experiments all day, and sometimes it's hard to find the self-motivation to continue. I'm ashamed to say I've not finished all the tracks available, because life gets in the way, but I will definitely be going back. I highly recommend Datacamp.
   Pros: hands down the best online tool for learning how to code if you have zero experience.
   Cons: pure coding, does not integrate biological data analysis (there are now a few independent courses about sequencing analysis, but I have not gone through them. I will update this post as I do). Also, the first few courses are free, but if you want to continue the tracks, there is a subscription fee. If you are at an academic institution, like my human, they might cover your subscription costs if you are a trainee.
   
**2. Books**

  *1.1. Practical computing for biologists, by Haddock and Dunn.*
    This book is amazing. It is not a book about coding, or a book about biology, but rather a mishmash. It starts you with using the shell for some elementary tasks, then moves onto integrating things like nucleic acid or protein sequences, data retrieval, and simple analysis into those skills. It doesn't really teach a particular language (though most of the examples use python, which you'll became quite comfortable with if you go through the entire book). A must-have. It cured me of my fear of the command line. However, at the end of the day, this book will not teach you how to analyze your RNA-seq data. The authors say it themselves - it is not a cookbook, it teaches you to come up with your own recipes. I am, sadly, an impatient cat. It did help me get started, and I actually worked up the nerve to sign up for Datacamp only after reading this book. However, because it isn't a cookbook, I did eventually lose interest and patience after a while. You can only look at so many FASTA sequences and come up with clever little ways to use regular expressions to sort through data so many times, until you start wondering when you'll be able to run that ChIP-seq pipeline. I still consult this book regularly, because it was written for people like me: biologists who want to learn informatics. But it isn't enough. 
    Pros: well-written, succint, written neither for programmers nor genomics experts, but biologists looking to learn computation.
    Cons: not a cookbook, will not give you the chunks of code you need to run for your data analysis. 
    
  *1.2. Analysis of Biological Data, by Whitlock and Schuter.* 
  Do you make bar plots and do t-tests without knowing whether your analysis should be parametric or non-parametric? Do you scratch your head when the central limit theorem comes up? Do you get confused when people discuss Bayesian versus frequentist statistics? Read this book! It is the best book out there for brushing up on your biostatistics. Programming knowledge alone is not sufficient to become a bioinformatician. In fact, just writing code without knowing which method is best for analysis mathematically probably makes you a bad scientist (I've seen plenty of papers like that out there, something I only began noticing after I educated myself a little on statistics).
    Pros: not as expensive as most textbooks out there. A comprehensive, yet simply written primer on biostatistics.
    Cons: doesn't really focus on high-throughput data analysis. Does not teach practical skills.
  
  *1.3. An introduction to bioinformatics algorithms, by Jones and Pevzner.* Curious to understand what goes on under the hood? This book goes down into the nitty gritty of computational algorithms. If you read it you will understand the reasoning behind the commonly used algorithms like BLAST and BLOSUM, gene predictions, repeat analysis...etc. Alas, as brilliant as my feline mind is, it was a little too abstract for me, and I think requires a better grasp of mathematics and computer science than I have.
  
  *1.4. The Biostars Handbook.* Put together by Istvan Albert and containing contributions from many experts in the field, who are primarily contributors on the Biostars forums (see below), this book is touted as the missing guide. I rolled my eyes a little when I noticed they charge money for it, when clearly if I spent some time, I could find most of the information online. However, the fact is, I don't have time to spend days and weeks on reddit compiling these resources, and reverse engineering to understand more complicated code. The book itself is $25, I believe, and there are some subscription plans that allow you to recieve the updated versions for a certain time period depending on how much you pay. It is definitely a work in progress (they are on the second edition now). An online course to complement the book is also in the works. While I frown upon having to pay for information on the internet, while I could spend that money on cat food and mousey toys instead, I have to admit that this book is worth every penny. It is an amazing resource. It not only walks you through code line by line, but also teaches you the reasoning behind the popular computational software we use today, and which one is the best for the purpose of analyzing your own data. Do you use a short read aligner or not? What do the heatmaps and metaplots generated by DeepTools mean anyway? How do you download data from the sequence read archive and analyze it? RNAseq? ChIPseq? Gene ontology? Metagenomics? They've got you covered. A downside is that it is sequencing-centric - you won't find anything on translation and proteomics in there, but maybe eventually, they will move into those territories as well. Get this book! Or make your lab get it for you. 
    
**3. Websites/blogs**
  SeqAnswers and Biostars are the two best resources you have out there on the world-wide web, when it comes to computational biology questions. If you have a question, it has probably been asked on these forums. If your code throws an error, search it on there, and you will likely find someone else who had the same issue. The internet is a gold mine. For the self-motivated, everything to learn is out there. However, many of us have so many other tasks on our minds that it's not always possible to have the organizational skills or discipline to find the best online resources for ourselves. I struggle with this a lot, so there is no one-size-fits-all online resource out there for me that I can say is sufficient for learning computational biology. 

**4. Workshops/bootcamps**
  *takes a deep breath*. I've gone through all the self-learning you can do above. If you are a good self-learner, the stuff above has got you covered. But as I've alluded to, I am an impatient cat with many things to do, such as ~~sleeping, eating, grooming~~ experiments, writing manuscripts, keeping up with scientific literature, career building...the list goes on and on, and the further I progress in my career, the longer this list gets. I came down to the conclusion that I simply don't have the bandwith to effectively self-learn. There's not enough time, not enough self-discipline, not enough of a foundation on statistics, math, and coding, for me to dive into this area. For me, the solution was clear. I needed someone to teach me the basics, step-by-step. If you are in graduate school or undergrad, I would encourage you to sign up for dedicated courses that will be just as useful as learning things online, if not better. Ultimately, it depends on your learning style, of course, but I learn best if I go through structured material and am tasked with solving problems as I learn skills. 
  One resource definitely worth checking out is *Cold Spring Harbor Labs' courses*. These are comprehensive, high-intensity workshops that will teach you a specific skillset in biology in the span of a few weeks. Mouse genetics? Single-cell RNA-seq? Mass spec? You name it. There are two courses, Programming for Biologists, and Statistics for Functional Genomics, that look really promising. If your lab/institution is willing to dole out the money (upwards of $2000, approaching $4000 for some courses. Yikes!) or you can get a travel award from CSHL to subsidize the costs, I would recommend checking them out.
  I've stuck to more local resources. I am currently enrolled in a *data science bootcamp* run by my university. It is not geared towards biologists at all, some parts of it are definitely not interesting for me and I can't presently see any use for them (I'm looking at you SQLAlchemy!), though that might change...the back-end technologies have been tremendously useful for me. I use git and python quite regularly now, and have even written small programs for day-to-day lab tasks like primer design, and reverse complementing sequences (ie. programs a kitten could write. Whatever, I'm still proud of myself). The front-end stuff, which we're just getting into, might be less useful, but hey, I worked up the courage to start this blog after that basic HTML class (even though I ended up using Jekyll/Ruby, and a template made by Dean Attani in the end). One thing worth saying is that committing to actual coursework is a huge time commitment. There are a whopping 10 hours of classes every week, spread across three days, for six months, and homework assignments that will also suck up several hours of your time. There is of course, the cost too. I work at an institution that subsidizes tuition for employees, which is the only reason I was able to afford this course. It's not a decision you should make lightly. That being said, it's been very useful for me.
  
  Conclusion? I still can't run DeepTools or an RNA-seq pipeline, but I feel like I'm slowly getting there. I will update this post as I make more progress, as well as adding shorter blog posts on the go for other things I've learned. Remember, felines and humans, you can do anything you put your mind to! I will hopefully convince you of this statement by gaining proficiency in these skills enough to use them in my career. Keep reading, and coding!

